# 2022 NFL Defensive Tackle Probability Analysis

For this project we decided to utilize the project theme and outline from the 2024 National Football League (NFL) Big Data Bowl through Kaggle. With the theme being tackles, we knew it would be best for us to focus on the defensive side of the ball. Teams are always looking for ways to better handle offensive power houses especially with recent increases in passing plays. With that being said, we decided to create a tackle probability model to determine which variables are most significant to a player successfully completing a tackle. 

For our initial analysis, we decided to look into the specific tackle probabilities of certain defensive positions. Since we are using mostly tracking data, we are able to quantify plays in terms of player distance to the ball, speed and acceleration of that player, time in seconds from the snap, and play itself among other variables. The hope is that we would be able to detect patterns based on positional groups and decide the important factors of these players making a tackle. We will start with one play, but then work up to all teams and games in the 2023 season for a more robust comprehension of tackle probability. We will then do a deep dive into the Kansas City Chiefs as a team example since they were the 2023 Super Bowl Champions. We will look into their best defensive players for tackling and how their defense is doing for specific offensive formations. 

### Results 

For our initial logistic model, we predicted tackle based on all of the variables we had in from the dataset we created. The four most significant variables were acceleration, distance from the football at the time of the snap, and the difference in speed between the ball carrier and the tackler at the time of the snap and the time of the tackle. Certain positions were also significant with inside linebacker having the most significance followed by defensive end and outside linebacker. The other significant variable in the regression was the distance from the football at the time of the tackle. 

We made predictions using this logistic regression model on the validation dataset and with a cutoff of 0.50, we had an accuracy of 0.82. This had a sensitivity of 0.99 and a specificity of 0.02 meaning our classifier was favoring a prediction of “1” for a made tackle. Our data set contained more instances of class “1” than class “0” so we used the area under the curve to find the best threshold to balance sensitivity and specificity. This produced a cutoff of 0.83, so we ran the predictions again with this cutoff,  the accuracy decreased to 0.56. Additionally, the model had a more balanced sensitivity and specificity of 0.51 and 0.79, respectively. While this accuracy is not much better than randomly guessing, we were able to dig deeper into the predictions and look at tackle probability by position groups and offensive formations.
 
Based on linebackers being significant at the 0.001 level and the linemen being significant at the 0.01 level we decided to do more modeling based on this variable. The first method we utilized was a logistic mixed-effects model with only the variables that were significant in the initial model, as mentioned above. The mixed effects model allowed the regression slopes and intercepts to vary by positional group and this will allow us to reveal each group’s predicted probability of a tackle. The model predicts cornerbacks making the tackle 87% of the time, safeties nearly 85% of the time, linebackers nearly 81% of the time, and linemen 79% of the time. 

From this analysis, we were able to see the interactions between different variables and the data better. For all four of the positional logistic regressions run (cornerback, linebacker, lineman, and safety), we found that the time from the snap to the tackle was the most significant predictor of a tackle. Besides that, all four models had varying significance levels for the speed between the ball carrier and the tackler at the time of tackle. This indicates that the length of the play and the likelihood of the tackle being made are significantly related. The coefficient of the relationship between tackle and the time between snap and tackle is negative for all four models. This indicates that the shorter the play the more likely the tackle is to be made. 

Following the development of the models, we determined the accuracy of the predictions based on the cutoff determined by the “roc'” function, just like initially stated. All four models had a high recommended cutoff levels ranging from 0.72 to 0.92. Based on the cutoffs that produced the highest area under the curve for the “roc”' plot, we created correlation matrices. These matrices revealed low accuracies with cornerbacks at 0.59, linebackers at 0.51, lineman at 0.67, and safeties at 0.67. These models have pretty low accuracies due to the randomness found in sports. Within the four models, we see more variability at their ability to ensure they are predicting the tackle being made or the tackle not being made. The sensitivity of the models tells us how accurately we are predicting the tackle being made with linemen having the most success in this category with 0.70 accuracy. Safeties, cornerbacks, and linebackers follow with 0.65, 0.52, and 0.43 respectively. This tells us that only three out of four of our models are able to predict the tackle being made better than a random guess. In this case, the specificity is the error rate of the prediction when the tackle will not be made, with cornerbacks at 0.82 accuracy, linebackers at 0.81 accuracy, and safeties at 0.78 accuracy. Our linemen model is less efficient than the others with only a 0.57 accuracy. Overall our safeties and linemen models are better than the linebackers and cornerbacks with higher accuracies and reasonable amounts of variation in the sensitivity and specificity. 

We decided to use our models to dig deeper into the tackling performance of the Kansas City Chiefs in the 2023 season. We divided the data in groups by offense formation and then took the average of the tackle probabilities. We found that the Chiefs have the highest tackle probabilities against the Empty, I-Formation, and Shotgun offensive setups with average tackling probabilities of 0.88, 0.82, and 0.81 respectively. For the six offensive formations that were in the data, the Chiefs have average tackle probabilities of 0.68 or greater for all of them. We then looked at the Chiefs players and looked at what offensive formations they do the best against. The Chief’s cornerback, Jaylen Watson, appeared to have the best overall tackle performance, appearing in the top eight of four of the six offensive formations.

